Let's talk about how Django
interacts with databases.
Let's Ctrl+C out of this for
just a moment and
open up this folder in VS Code,
either with code.
Or by going to VS Code and
saying File, Open,
and then opening this folder.
And let's open a Python file by
using the Quick Find Ctrl+P or
Command P and opening models.py.
And this will start
the the Python extension,
make sure you click down here and
ensure that the right virtual
environment is selected for
me it's ./bin/Python.
And that will clear up any if you saw some
squigglies before, under here, that's
because Django was not installed in the
virtual environment that VS code selected.
I'm not sure why it's not selecting
the right thing at the moment or
recognizing my virtual environments.
Maybe it's a weird setting on my side
because it is something that usually
works quite well.
I've opened up models.py.
And models.py lives in the blog folder,
but
I recommend that you open
that up via the Quick Find.
This is a custom model that I've defined
in Django and it's got a few fields in it.
It's got a title which is the character
field with a maximum of 300.
It's got a body which is a text field.
It's got a slug which is a newspaper term
but you might see used commonly in blogs.
A slug is a way of taking a title and
then adding,
removing any special characters,
adding dashes or underscores.
That some of that title can be in the URL
for the blog post for SEO purposes.
And then we also have a created at
field which is a date time field and
a string representation of our model.
Now this model maps to a database,
a sequel lite database that we have on
our systems and we don't need
to know anything about sequel or
databases in order to use databases
with Django, which is just great.
Once we create our application here at
the blog app, we're going to want to make
sure that when we open settings.py,
which is the global settings for
our Django application, and
we scroll down to installed_Apps,
we want make sure that we have
blog.apps.BlogConfig in here.
That tells Django to register
various applications.
Now, the practical blog
directory is the project.
Level directory where all the project
specific settings live for
my, this project.
The blog directory has app
specific stuff in it for my blog.
When you're working on
small Django projects,
having multiple apps doesn't matter,
but let's say you are a company.
And practical blog is your project.
Now you might have an app for a blog, you
might have an app for an e-commerce site.
You might have an app for a forum.
And those are all going to have their
own individual folders in Django,
where you can define your models and
views and routes and
everything for that specific app
in its own happy little namespace.
Now, I'm not going to talk about
how to make migrations, but
if you do want to complete the final
exercise, I recommend that you go back to.
This section, anytime you change your
models, let's say you delete one
of these or you add a new one, you need
to tell Django to make instructions for
the database, to match the new model,
and then run those instructions.
Let's say if you delete a field here,
Django needs to issue instructions to
drop a column from a table in a database.
In order to do that, you need to run
a command called make migrations.
You can optionally pass in
the name of the app here.
It's called blog.
And then you can run the migrate
command and that will go ahead and
update your database so
that it matches your latest models.
If you want to work with models,
you can do that in the python.
Shell.
I'm going to open up my terminal here.
And type in Python managed.py
followed by the word shell,
this is going to bring up
a special Django shell
that knows a lot about how
our project is structured.
It's a little bit different than
just a standard ruppel, now we can
work with our models and objects that
we defined in Django in the shell.
For example, I can say from blog.models,
import posts,
and that is the model that
I had defined up there.
Now I can query that model by saying,
sorry,
post.objects.all is going to query all of
the tables, all the rows in this table.
Currently, we don't have any.
If I wanted to, I have an example for
creating posts.
From the command line here, so
let me just copy and
paste this first post here.
I'm defining all of the fields
providing values for
all of the fields I defined up here.
Title body and slug everything except for
created because I'm using this
auto add auto now add equals true.
That means when I create
a row in this database,
it's going to automatically
add the created at timestamp.
In order for
me to save this into my database I need
to run first post.save and
now, when I rerun my
query, My first post is in here.
Let's go ahead and open a new tab in
VS code and start our server again.
Python manage.py runserver.
If you never exited your server in the
first place and you try to run it again,
you might get an error about
the port being busy or occupied.
Know that means that you're probably
already running your server in
a different tab.
There is my first post
reflected in the webpage.
We can interact with these models,
just like objects in Python.
There's a get method so
I can pass in to get get me where
the slug is equal to first post.
And that will return
the record I just created,
if I say first post to I'm going to get
an exception here, post does not exist.
There's no post matching
your query makes sense.
I can also use the dot filter method.
Get will get you one result dot
filter will get you a list.
And you'll see that you
got a query set back.
If you have multiple items that match
that query, they'll come back there.
This query set kind of acts like
a list and you can treat it as one so
you can call.
Let's save this to
a variable called results.
You can call length on results.
You can get the first item and results.
Just like a list, this will throw an
exception because we only have one item.
This throws list index out of range.
The Django Orem It features a lot
of optimizations under the hood.
And the best part is you really don't
need to know about the internal workings
of databases to take
full advantage of them.